Pakistan’s water crisis is not merely about the water scarcity, but it is also the ineffective forms of governance which have been responsible for ineffective water management. As according to global water partnership’s framework for action (2000), “the water crisis is often a crisis of governance”, the inefficient supply of services due to mismanagement, and lack of appropriate institutions besides lack of human capacity has resulted in the insufficiency of water in the country. Thus, the governance which is all about making choices, decisions and tradeoffs need evidence-based analyses and information which can help improve the water governance through informed decision making (Olsson, 2015) (Falkenmark, 2008). Keeping in mind the present and future water crisis there are different management options, the approval and execution of these options are only possible when all the stakeholders agree on a feasible option that can solve water-related issues in Pakistan. Moreover, that is only possible when the options are evaluated in an integrated way and presented to stakeholder with strong evidence supported by scientific data.
Keeping in view, the need of evidence-based decision support system, the US Pakistan center for advanced studies in water at Mehran University of engineering and technology-Jamshoro awarded a project titled as “Development of a decision support system for water resources planning and management in Pakistan” under the theme of strengthening the water governance. The prime goal of the project was to develop a baseline model and data dissemination portal for decision making for water resources and planning at the country level. The other goal was to build the capacity in Pakistan for developing and using decision support system for water resources planning and management.
In this project, an integrated data sharing and modeling prototype platform is implemented for standard online sharing of the data and decision making for water management and planning in Pakistan.
In the first phase, a data sharing platform is designed and implemented on the web-based server that has standard protocols for data sharing and formats. In this project, we have demonstrated that how the time series and geo-spatial data (that occurs mostly in water resources) can be arranged in a standard format and can be shared among the registered users. Implemented web portal can upload the data, so any registered organization can upload the relevant data and can be shared with other registered organization. This sets up a standard sharing mechanism within and among the organizations. We have also implemented a workflow for associating targets and indicators for international monitoring. This will provide the organization to map the shared data concerning the monitoring indicators. 
In the second phase, a baseline node-link system model is implemented in water evaluation and planning (WEAP) framework that represents the significant reservoirs, barrages and link canals of the irrigation system in Pakistan. Performance of the estimates at the barrage inflow is of satisfactory and can be used to simulate scenario about the question of demand management and barrage/reservoir management at the country scale. Crop water requirement (for selected crops) and domestic water requirement is incorporated in the model. This implemented model is a baseline model that ability be further improved by the departments in Pakistan to test relevant scenarios to support the decision making.
In the last phase of the project, we demonstrated how the scenarios could be simulated to test different what-if questions using the implemented model. First of all, we did baseline assessment using the data and the model results. It was observed that the rate of reference evapotranspiration has excellent variability in canal command areas of Pakistan. Generally, southern areas are most climatic disadvantageous areas. Specifically, Guddu left, Khairpur East and Khairpur West command areas have the highest rate of evapotranspiration, and they transpire 80 in/year to 83 in/year of water for reference crop. High delta crops grown in these regions requires more water depth. Therefore, limited availability of water has restricted extensive irrigation practices and also constrained the expendability of the area under cultivation.
Analyzing the demand and supply situation of each canal command area. It was observed that the canal command areas of Sindh have heavily relied on the availability of surface water. It may be because Sindh has less groundwater potential as compared to Punjab and also groundwater quality is not good and is deteriorating due to waterlogging, salinity, and seawater intrusion. It was also seen that the Sindh has to face major shortages in dry seasons. Out of 23 years of analysis, 11 times Punjab extracted excess to its allocated share in Rabi season. Therefore, Sindh faced shortages of supplies in Rabi seasons. This can also be attributed to non-transparent operations of link canals and Mangla reservoir.
While looking at different population growth scenarios, it was observed that the domestic water demand would be difficult to fulfill by the canal water by 2025. Canal command area in which there are big cities especially Kotri, there will be significant management issues regarding prioritizing high the water for the use of domestic than of agriculture.
Integrated data sharing and system model implemented through this grant is the step towards introducing the methods to be used in Pakistan to manage the system in an integrated manner. Future improvements and outreach are of prime importance to sustain the developed prototype in this project. The way forward for;

### Data Management and Sharing

1. Register the departments that intend to share their data and need technical help. Once departments are registered and start sharing the data, then it can be used as a demonstration case to attract other departments to manage and efficiently share their data. Once the departments come in the loop, then it will be easy to standardize the data in one database.
2. Build capacity of the registered departments to upload and share the data on the web-based portal. Initially, that can be done on the web portal implemented in this research project, which further can be modified at the departmental level, considering the details needs of the departments in the water sector.
3. Approval of the standard protocols for central data sharing.
4. Approval of the controlled vocabulary of the variables that departments need to share nationally and internationally.
5. Program to increase the awareness of the importance of central data sharing in the water sector.
6. Encourage the policymaker to build a separate department that handles the central data repository.

### Mode l Application and Enhancement

1. The model should be handed over to the concerned department so that they can run the scenarios that are of their importance.
2. Training sessions should be organized within the concerned departments to build the capacity of the department to modify, simulate and test the scenarios
3. The model implemented is at the barrage command level, this aggregation unit should be scaled down to the canal command area to address the issues at the canal command area. Further for more detail analysis, this has to scale down to distributary level to answer the question related to the management questions and livelihood of people.
4. This model is capable of solving scenarios for the interprovincial questions but is not capable of answer the question within or between the canal commands. In line, departments should be taken on board to consolidate the data on the canal command level and enhance mode l, such that it can also be used to test management scenario at the canal command level
5. Hydropower production node is not modeled, to answer the production question that needs to model in detail.
6. Mode l system boundaries do not include the upper Indus basin model that needs to be implemented to answer the question of climate change. Catchment modeling need to performed to see the response on the hydrograph due to changing the climate.
7. Groundwater usage is not simulated in the present model. The implemented model only provided a tool to test the surface water system. As it is a second largest source of irrigation, it should be integrated into the system model.

### Water System Management

Based on the analysis done in this project. Following recommendations are provided to manage the demand and supply in canal command area.
1. For increasing the irrigation intensities in southern areas, the cropping pattern needs to be modified. For example in Rabi season Oilseed or Pulses may be preferred instead of wheat. They not only consume less water but also possess high economic value as compared to wheat. Therefore, these two crops are good option to increase the economic output and area under cultivation. Similarly in Kharif sorghum may be grown in combination with rice in alternate furrows.
2. The telemetry data at the critical location can help in reducing the mistrust among the province.
3. The transparent operations rules of CJ link and Mangla Dam must be formulated, to ensure the equitable share of lower riparian provinces
4. Province of Sindh has to implement policies to reduce its water use, as it is at the disadvantageous end for being a lower riparian and highly dependent on the surface water. It also has canal command area that will have higher domestic demand in the future. Proper management policies should be implemented in Sindh to meet the domestic and agriculture demand in future.

